---
layout: post
title:  "Git Commands I Use Every Day"
categories: [DevOps]
tags: [blog,tech,git,devops]
image:
  path: /media/git/git-banner.png
  alt: Git Commands I Use Every Day
---

In this post, I will present some of the Git commands that I have come to use regurlarly in my day to day work. I am anything but a Git power user, but I am working to change that, command by command. And along with my Git skills, this post will grow, command by command. I hope that it will also help you towards becoming a more confident Git user!


### Messed Up a Commit?
#### `git commit --amend`

Let's say you just committed some meaningful work that you are very proud of. Now you would like to push it to your repo and share it with everyone. But what's that? You called that one variable `youre_variable` instead of `your_variable`? Left in some obscure debugging output? And that line is indented one space too far! That's terrible. You don't want everyone to know about that by creating a new commit with an explicit message and explicit changes, basically displaying your concentration lapses to everyone on a silver platter! (More importantly, it can lead to a cluttered Git history.)

`git commit --amend` is here for you. It re-opens the previous commit you made and lets you add to it. First, fix what you would like to fix and stage those changes. Then `git commit --amend`. You will now also get the chance to edit the commit message of the last commit. Once this is saved, your fixes are now contained in the previous commit! Of course, you can also directly `git commit --amend -m "Updated commit message"`. However I always prefer the former, as I get to see again what my previous commit's message was, making sure I'm not overwriting anything important.

**Note** If you have already pushed the commit you would like to amend and then try pushing the amended commit, Git will prompt you to pull first, because your local and remote branches have diverged. This makes sense, because now your most recent commit has changes that remote does not have. You could force push, but of course that is never advisable if multiple people are working on your branch. So think before you push 😁

### Forgot the Previous Branch's Name?
#### `git checkout -`

Naming things in a descriptive way is very important. However this can cause a bit of a headache when working with very descriptively named Git branches. Suppose you named your feature branch `feature/a-very-specific-feature-brach-name`, and quickly had to switch to `main` to inspect something. Check over, lets head back to your feature branch. What was it called again? `feature/very-specific-feature-brach-name`? Or `feature/a-very-specific-brach-name`? I struggle with this after a few hours of work. Of course you could just `git branch` every time, to list all the branch names in your local Git repo. But then you need to look for your branch name and type it into the console each time. 

This is where `git checkout -` comes in. Can you guess what it does? That's right! It simply and quickly checks out the branch you were on before heading over to `main`. Forgot some detail of what you had just inspected in `main`? Jump right back over there with `git checkout -`. As you can see, this is an incredibly useful and time-saving command, especially when regularly switching between branches. It also greatly reduces brain fatigue experienced when trying to remember a bunch of branch names, in addition to juggling function and variable names from your actual program. Every little bit helps!